mds: add quiesce protocol (#54581)
ceph/ceph: doc/dev/mds_internals/quiesce.rst

The sub-requests launched are ``quiesce_inode`` internal requests. These will
obtain "cap-related" locks which control capability state, including the
``filelock``, ``authlock``, ``linklock``, and ``xattrlock``. Additionally, the
new local lock ``quiescelock`` is acquired. More information on that lock in
the next section.

Locks that are not cap-related are skipped because they do not control typical
and durable metadata state. Additionally, only Capabilities can give a client
local control of a file's metadata or data.

Once all locks have been acquired, the cap-related locks are released and the
``quiescelock`` is relied on to prevent issuing Capabilities to clients for the
cap-related locks. This is controlled primarily by ``CInode:get_caps_*``
methods. Releasing these locks is necessary to allow other ranks with the
replicated inode to quiesce without lock state transitions resulting in
deadlock. For example, a client wanting ``Xx`` on an inode will trigger a
``xattrlock`` in ``LOCK_SYNC`` state to transition to ``LOCK_SYNC_EXCL``.  That
state would not allow another rank to acquire ``xattrlock`` for reading,

> thereby creating deadlock, subject to quiesce expiration. (Quiesce cannot

Reviewer: ... subject to quiesce timeout/expiration

Author: fixed

complete until all ranks quiesce the tree.)

Finally, if the inode is a directory, the ``quiesce_inode`` operation traverses
all directory fragments and issues new ``quiesce_inode`` requests for any child
inodes.

Inode Quiescelock
-----------------

The ``quiescelock`` is a new local lock for inodes which supports quiescing
I/O.  It is a type of superlock where every client or MDS operation which
requires a wrlock or xlock on a "cap-related" inode lock will also implicitly
acquire a wrlock on the ``quiescelock``.

.. note:: A local lock supports multiple writers and only one exclusive locker. No read locks.

During normal operation in the MDS, the ``quiescelock`` is never held except
for writing. However, when a subtree is quiesced, the ``quiesce_inode``
internal operation will hold ``quiescelock`` exclusively for the entire
lifetime of the ``quiesce_inode`` operation. This will deny the **new**
acquisition of any other cap-related inode lock.  The ``quiescelock`` must be ordered
before all other locks (see ``src/include/ceph_fs.h`` for ordering) in order to
act as this superlock.

> One primary reason for this ``quiescelock`` is to prevent a client request from

Reviewer: I think this paragraph is outdated

Author: I don't think so? The `quiescelock` still causes an mdr to drop all locks if acquisition fails. We do not want a client to block waiting for the quiescelock while holding a rdlock on a parent's snaplock.

Author: I updated some of the wording in the following paragraph however.

MDS Quiesce Protocol
====================

> The MDS quiesce protocol is a a mechanism for "quiescing" (quieting) a

Reviewer 2: "a" is doubled here

> subvolume in the file system, stopping all write (and most read) I/O.  A

Reviewer 2: s/the/a/

> subvolume is a subtree in the file system marked with the "ceph.dir.subvolume"

Reviewer 2: Suggest backticks instead of doublequotes.

> flag (like the mgr volumes plugin subvolumes).

Reviewer 2: s/mgr/Manager/

The purpose of this API is to prevent multiple clients from interleaving reads
and writes across an eventually consistent snapshot barrier where out-of-band
communication exists between clients. This communication can lead to clients

> wrongly believing they've reached a checkpoint that is mutually recoverable to

Reviewer 2: s/to//

Author: I would think this is correct, as it's recovering **to** a snapshot?

Reviewer: This is a nice summary of the quiesce feature as the means to achieve consistent snapshots!
Let's have a TODO to link to the `subvolume quiesce` command.

via a snapshot.

Mechanism
---------

The MDS quiesces I/O using a new ``quiesce_subvolume`` internal request that
obtains appropriate locks on the root of a subvolume and then launches a series
of sub-requests for locking other inodes in the subvolume. The locks obtained

> will force clients to release caps and in-progress client/mds requests to

Reviewer 2: MDS

complete.

The sub-requests launched are ``quiesce_subvolume_inode`` internal requests

> which simply lock the inode, if auth. Generally, these are read locks on each

Reviewer 2: s/auth/granted/?

> Inode metadata lock but the ``filelock`` is xlocked (exclusively locked)

Reviewer 2: Other instances of "inode" here are not capitalized.  Suggest consistency one way or the other.

because its type allows for multiple readers and writers. Additionally, a new

> "quiescelock" is exclusively locked (more on that next).

Reviewer 2: backticks?

> The inodes are in a subvolume are known because subvolumes are special kind of

Reviewer 2: This seems awkward, perhaps s/are// ?

SnapRealm. Before the quiesce protocol was written, the MDS already kept track
of inodes with capabilities in the SnapRealm. It is further enhanced to keep a
list of all inodes in cache.

Because the ``quiesce_subvolume_inode`` request will xlock the ``filelock``, it

> is necessary to only run this operation on the authoritative MDS. It is

Reviewer 2: I think "is only necessary to run"

expected that the glue layer on top of the quiesce protocol will execute the
same ``quiesce_subvolume`` operation on each MDS rank. This allows each rank
which may be authoritative for part of the subvolume to lock its auth inodes in
the subvolume ``SnapRealm``.

Inode Quiescelock
-----------------

> The quiescelock is a new lock for Inodes which supports quiescing I/O.  It is a

Reviewer 2: Inode/inode?

MDS Quiesce Protocol
====================

> The MDS quiesce protocol is a mechanism for "quiescing" (quieting) a subvolume
> in a file system, stopping all write (and most read) I/O.  A subvolume is a
> subtree in the file system marked with the ``ceph.dir.subvolume`` flag (like
> the ``ceph-mgr`` volumes plugin subvolumes).

Reviewer: I'd like to decouple the generic quiesce mechanism that is technically applicable to any file system path, and the current limitation that requires the path to point to a snap realm without child realms, which is the case for subvolumes.

```suggestion
The MDS quiesce protocol is a mechanism for "quiescing" (quieting) a path
in a file system, stopping all write (and most read) I/O within the subtree.  
The current implementation limits the supported paths to the roots of subvolumes
created with the ``ceph-mgr`` volumes plugin.
```

Author: I added a note clarifying this.

Author: yes, done.

complete.

The sub-requests launched are ``quiesce_subvolume_inode`` internal requests
which simply lock the inode, if the MDS is authoritative for the inode.
Generally, these are rdlocks (read locks) on each inode metadata lock but the
``filelock`` is xlocked (exclusively locked) because its type allows for
multiple readers and writers. Additionally, a new ``quiescelock`` is exclusively
locked (more on that next).

The inodes in a subvolume are known because subvolumes are a special kind of
``SnapRealm``. Before the quiesce protocol was written, the MDS already kept
track of inodes with issued capabilities in the ``SnapRealm``. It is further
enhanced to keep a list of all inodes in cache.

Because the ``quiesce_subvolume_inode`` request will xlock the ``filelock`` and
``quiescelock``, it is necessary to run this operation only on the
authoritative MDS. It is expected that the glue layer on top of the quiesce
protocol will execute the same ``quiesce_subvolume`` operation on each MDS
rank. This allows each rank which may be authoritative for part of the
subvolume subtree to lock all inodes it is authoritative for in the subvolume

> ``SnapRealm``.

Reviewer: good point - we should add the corresponding developer doc for the quiesce db and link to it from here. Maybe just embed a dead link here for now and we'll populate it later

Author: I think the docs build complains if we do that.

Reviewer: ok. We could then just create a stub page with a TBD section, but that's not critical.

by the operation are dropped and the operation waits for the ``quiescelock`` to
be available.  The lock is mandatory in that all inode locks automatically
include (add) the ``quiescelock`` when calling ``Locker::acquire_locks``. So
the expected normal flow is that an operation like ``getattr`` will perform its
path traversal, acquiring parent and dentry locks, then attempt to acquire
locks on the inode necessary for the requested client caps. The operation will
fail to acquire the automatically included ``quiescelock``, add itself to the
``quiescelock`` wait list, and then drop all held locks.

Readable quiesced subvolume
---------------------------

It may be desirable to allow readers to continue accessing a quiesced
subvolume. One way to do that is to have a separate superlock (yuck) for read
access, say ``quiescerlock``. If a "readable" quiesce is performed, then
``quiescerlock`` is not xlocked by ``quiesce_subvolume_inode``. Read locks on
other (non-quiesce) locks will acquire a read lock only on ``quiescerlock`` and
no longer on ``quiescelock``.  Write locks would try to acquire both
``quiescelock`` and ``quiescerlock`` (since writes may also read).

> Ideally, it may be a new lock could be used to handle both cases but no such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, it may be a new lock class could be used to handle both cases but no such
```

Author: Fixed.

Author: We call it a LockType in the code; I used "type" i instead.

MDS Quiesce Protocol
====================

The MDS quiesce protocol is a mechanism for "quiescing" (quieting) a tree
in a file system, stopping all write (and most read) I/O.

The purpose of this API is to prevent multiple clients from interleaving reads
and writes across an eventually consistent snapshot barrier where out-of-band
communication exists between clients. This communication can lead to clients
wrongly believing they've reached a checkpoint that is mutually recoverable to
via a snapshot.

> Mechanism

Author: I will update the docs while I'm QA'ing this.
